---
layout: post
title: "Aalto Dictionary of ML – Probability Mass Function"
date: 2025-12-07
seo_title: "Probability Mass Function"
seo_description: "Probability Mass Function"
markdown: kramdown
---



The pmf of a discrete random variable (RV) $x$ is a function
$p^{(x)}\left(\cdot\right): \mathcal{X}\rightarrow [0,1]$ that assigns
to each possible value $x' \in \mathcal{X}$ of the random variable (RV)
$x$ the probability
$p^{(x)}\left(x'\right) = \mathbb{P}\left(x' = x\right)$ (Papoulis and
Pillai 2002). Fig. [1](#fig_pmf_dict){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig_pmf_dict"} illustrates the pmf of a discrete random
variable (RV) $x$.

![The pmf $p^{(x)}\left(\cdot\right)$ of a discrete random variable (RV)
$x$ taking values in the set $\mathcal{X}= \{\star,\otimes\}$. Three
datasets are also shown whose relative frequencies of data points match
this pmf exactly. Such datasets could arise as realizations of
independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.) random variables (RVs)
sharing the common pmf $p^{(x)}\left(\cdot\right)$. []{#fig_pmf_dict
label="fig_pmf_dict"}](../images/pmf_tikz.png){#fig_pmf_dict
width="80%"}

A pmf always satisfies
{% raw %}$\sum_{x' \in \mathcal{X}} p^{(x)}\left(x'\right) = 1${% endraw %}. We can view a
pmf as representing a collection of (sufficiently long) datasets. This
collection contains any $\mathcal{D}= \{x^{(1)}, \,\ldots, \,x^{(m)}\}$,
with the relative frequencies of every value $x' \in \mathcal{X}$ being
close to the corresponding pmf value $p^{(x)}\left(x'\right)$,
$$\frac{\big|r\in \{1,\,\ldots,\,m\}: x^{(r)}= x' \big|}
 {m} \approx p^{(x)}\left(x'\right).$$ Note that requiring relative
frequencies to be close to the probability mass function (pmf) values
implies that the empirical entropy of such a dataset is close to the
entropy of the probability mass function (pmf)
$p^{(x)}\left(\cdot\right)$. Information theory refers to the collection
of such datasets as the typical set corresponding to the probability
mass function (pmf) $p^{(x)}\left(\cdot\right)$ (Cover and Thomas 2006).
A main result of information theory states that a dataset generated by
independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.) sampling from
$p^{(x)}\left(\cdot\right)$ belongs, with high probability, to the
typical set with respect to $p^{(x)}\left(\cdot\right)$ (Cover and
Thomas 2006, Th. 3.1.2).\
See also: random variable (RV), probability, probability distribution,
probabilistic model.

Cover, T. M., and J. A. Thomas. 2006. *Elements of Information Theory*.
2nd ed. Hoboken, NJ, USA: Wiley.

Papoulis, A., and S. Unnikrishna Pillai. 2002. *Probability, Random
Variables, and Stochastic Processes*. 4th ed. New York, NY, USA:
McGraw-Hill Higher Education.

---

📚 This explanation is part of the [Aalto Dictionary of Machine Learning](https://AaltoDictionaryofML.github.io) — 
an open-access multi-lingual glossary developed at Aalto University to support 
accessible and precise communication in ML.
